- Now we'll review visualization
and frequent data operations in the notebooks.
So we'll give you some examples to get started with
and we'll add to these as we come to newer problems
and use cases in the upcoming weeks as well.
For the visualization, I need to explain a quick,
something on matplotlib before you see it in the next week.
Matplotlib is a plotting library for Python
and Pandas leverages matplotlib underneath for its plots.
So if you want Jupyter to plot the graphs
inside the notebooks we'll have to tell Jupyter
to plot inline as we see here.
So notice the percentage sign
before the matplotlib in this notebook.
This is a symbol for a special class of functions
in Jupyter called magic functions.
So we'll simply, here, before we go through matplotlib
as a library, review,
or use matplotlib as an inline function.
So here the first thing I'd like to do
to get our data frame object in Pandas,
in this case, ratings is our data frame object,
and we'll use the histogram function to plot
the rating column of data frame ratings.
You can adjust the figure size using the command here.
So you want how big your figure to look.
There are many other options for controlling
the bin size and other things.
So you can see these all in the documentation
for data visualization in Python using Pandas.
So let's go ahead and execute this.
So what we've done, again is, we took the ratings column,
rating column, from the ratings data frame
and provided that column name
to histogram function as an input and we also used
the figsize option to adjust the graph size.
I'm running this and we'll see that a histogram
was generated using this.
And now we'll use a similar thing with histogram,
a similar code with histogram,
but this time we'll generate boxplots.
Pandas makes actually generating boxplots really easy.
We can get that ratings column, data frame,
and say dot boxplot and as you would remember to histogram
we would get, we gave column rating as our data,
the column that we are plotting,
and figsize in a similar way will be 15, 20.
Okay let's check to make sure our code here is correct.
And now I'll go ahead and run this.
So it's gonna work on that a little bit
and we'll see since we only have one column
that we gave as a data set,
we'll see a boxplot of that data.
As you remember our mean for our ratings
was about three point five
Here we see the average and the maximum
and the minimum of that distribution
nicely shown on this boxplot.
Zero point five and five on top.
So next, we'll start exploring
some of the data slicing, column slicing techniques
that we discussed.