- Turning results into action.
After this video, you will be able to explain
what turning insights into action means
and connect your results with your
business or scientific question.
Now that you have evaluated
the results from your analysis,
and generated reports on the potential value of the results,
the next step is to determine what action, or actions,
should be taken based on the insights gained.
Remember why we started bringing together large data sets
to analyze them in the first place.
The goal was to find actionable insights
to help answer scientific or commercial questions.
In this business, for example,
is there something wrong in your process
that should change to remove the bottlenecks?
Is there data that should be added to your application
to make it more accurate?
Or, should you segment your population
into more well-defined groups,
or more effective targets of markets.
Similarly, in science,
were the benefits from a drug trial
statistically significant,
or what is the present rate of deforestation,
and can you predict how much forest will remain in 15 years?
Just to name another example,
you could ask a question like
can you cluster distant planets
based on telescope images?
Now that you have some insights from the data?
The next step is turning that into action.
Based on what you've found,
it is likely, now, you have actions you could take
to improve your business,
better treat patients or improve the environment.
Now, you need to figure out how to implement the actions.
What is necessary to add this action to your process,
or application?
How should it be automated, if it can be?
The stakeholders need to be identified,
and become involved in this change.
Just as with any process improvement changes,
we need to monitor and measure the impact of the action
on the process or application.
Be sure to think about what data you should collect
during and after the change
to properly evaluate its impact.
Evaluating results from the implemented action
will determine your next steps.
Is there additional analysis that needs to be performed,
in order to yield even better results?
What data should be revisited?
Are there additional, or further ideas
that should be explored?
For example,
let's not forget what big data enables us.
We could be taking real-time action
based on rapidly streaming information.
In business, we need to define what part of our business
needs real-time action to be able to implement the operation
or the interaction with the customers.
With public service,
we need to know what action to take
when certain events are observed in the data.
Once we define these real-time actions,
we need to make sure that there are automated systems,
or processes, in our organization,
or scientific research group,
that perform such actions and provide failure recovery
in case of problems.
As a summary,
big data and data science are only useful
if the insights can be turned into actions,
and action should be carefully defined and evaluated.