- Next, we'll talk about step four, reporting insights.
After this video you will be able to determine
what to present in reporting your findings
and identify techniques to communicate your results.
The fourth step in our data science process
is reporting the insights gained from our analysis.
This is a very important step to communicate your insights
and make a case for what actions should follow.
It can change shape based on your audience
and should not be taken lightly.
How do we get started?
The first thing is to look at your results
and decide what to present.
Part of that means determining what part of your analysis
is most important to offer the biggest value
to your scientific community or your company
in your industry to your particular audience.
In deciding what to present,
you should ask yourself these questions.
What is my punchline?
In other words, what are the main results?
What value do these results provide based on
the specific domain that I'm working on,
and the application the question led me to?
How can the model add to this application?
In other words, how do the results compare
to the success criteria determined at the beginning
of the project for that application's specific purpose?
You need to include the answers to these questions
in your report or presentation.
So, make those questions and answers the main topics
and be sure to have the data
or visualizations to back them up.
Keep in mind that not all of your analysis
results may be rosy.
This is often very difficult to communicate.
Your analysis may show results that are counter
to what you were hoping to find,
or results that are inconclusive or puzzling.
You need to show these results as well.
Domain experts that you work with may find
some of these results to be puzzling,
and inconclusive findings lead to additional analysis.
Remember that the point of reporting your findings
is to determine what the next steps should be.
All findings must be presented so that
informed decisions can be made.
If you think about it, the biggest danger
is to make it seem like your results tell
a clear story when they actually don't.
If your conclusions are later found to be wrong,
your credibility could be seriously damaged.
Better to tell a complete and true story,
even if it isn't very clean, than to try to finesse things
and make them sound more clear than they really are.
Visualization is an important tool
in presenting your results.
The techniques that we discuss and explore in data
can be used here as well.
Scatter plots, line graphs, heat maps
and other types of graphs are effective ways
to present your results visually.
You should also have tables with details
from your analysis as a backup if someone wants
to take a deeper dive into the results.
There are many visualization tools that are available.
Some of the most popular open source ones are listed here,
including R, a software package for data analysis,
which has powerful visualization capabilities.
Python, that we will see in this class,
is a general purpose programming language,
or a scripting language, that allows you to use
a number of packages to support data analysis and graphics.
D3 is a JavaScript library for producing interactive
web-based visualizations and data-driven comments.
Leaflet is a lightweight, mobile-friendly JavaScript library
to create interactive maps.
Lastly, Tableau and Google Charts allow you to create
visualizations in your profiles so you can share them
or put them on a site or a blog, and they provide
cross-platform compatibility to mobile devices.
Timeline is a JavaScript library that allows you
to create timelines over these results.
We'll be using tools that connect well
with Python's Jupyter notebooks,
and we'll be focusing on visualization in an upcoming week.
In summary, you want to report your findings
by presenting your results,
and visualization tools help you do that effectively.