- In this video, we'll be learning
about variables in Python.
The learning goals for this video
are for you to be able to write simple programs
in Python and to understand how Python uses dynamic typing.
Here we have a simple program to print hello
in C and in Java.
Notice that there's a lot of extra stuff
needed beyond just printing,
particularly for the Java code.
In contrast, Python only requires
you to say print hello.
The simplicity is part of the reason
that Python is a language of choice,
both for beginners and for experts.
One thing to point out,
for those of you more familiar with other languages,
is that Python doesn't use semicolons
at the end of statements.
That, along with the fact that Python
uses indentation of code rather than brackets
will take some getting used to
for those of you who are more accustomed to other languages.
Alright, next we'll start using some variables.
The code on the left likely looks familiar
to those of you who know C, C++, or Java.
Or actually, a number of strongly typed languages.
What I mean by a strongly typed language
is that each variable has a type associate with it.
In the code here, we see that both X and Y
are set to be integers at the time they're declared.
Let's now look at the equivalent code in Python.
Again, we don't have the same overhead of declaring main
or including centered libraries with Python.
But we can also notice that,
because Python is a dynamically typed language,
there are no explicit types for X and Y.
Now for those of you who are curious about how this works,
realize that although you don't have to say
what type of variable it is, there are still types
behind the scenes with Python.
Let's take a quick look at some of these types.
Python has a number of common types.
And those types are pretty much what you'd expect.
We have numeric values, including integers and floats.
Listed values, binary bytes, booleans, and strings.
We'll be working with a number of these
in more detail later this week.
Going back to this notion of dynamic typing,
if a variable doesn't have a type, how do things work?
In the code on the left,
what happens if you try to assign an integer variable
with a float or double value?
You get an error.
But what happens in the Python code on the right
when you try to assign X to be 4.5?
X is assigned 4.5 with no error.
Python is actually totally content with you doing this.
Why?
Dynamic typing.
In our next video, we'll see why this works
when we start discussing objects in Python.
We'll see you there.