- Now that we have some basic knowledge
of the shell, let's start by exploring
some utility commands in the UNIX system.
At the end of this video you will be able
to list files and directories in UNIX,
change to a directory in UNIX, make new directories,
explain what standard in and standard out is,
and name six simple UNIX commands.
Probably the most fundamental commands in UNIX
or any other operating system
is related to being able to manage your file system.
We will now talk about the ls command
to list files in the UNIX system,
mkdir, which is short for make directory,
to create directories, and cd command
to change into a new directory.
We will also talk about the star character
that serves as a wildcard to replace
any other character within a given pattern.
For example, if I list *.txt
it will list all the files with a .txt extension.
Before we switch to the shell,
I would like to also talk about
the three file descriptors
the shell starts when they start up.
These descriptors are always ready for commands to use.
Standard in is the default source
for the user to enter inputs.
It is usually the user's keyboard
that we can all type through,
but it can easily be switched to be
another file via a file redirection.
Standard out is where the programs output or print:
their functional or primary outputs.
The default is the user's terminal, or your shell,
but it can easily be switched
to another process or another file via a file redirection.
Standard out should be kept for
the correct outputs of a command or program;
for anything else we use standard error.
So, standard error is the output channel
for error messages or any other non-functional outputs
coming out of your programs: for example,
your trace print statements.
The default for it is also the user's terminal window.
If you are a programmer, these three files
are also what the programmers use when reading,
writing, or reporting errors
or program diagnostics.
Now let's switch to the terminal
and try out some of what we learned.