- In this video, we'll learn how to use conditionals
in Python.
So by the end of this video
you should be able to author python programs
which use conditionals.
Let's think back to this loop example
where we used the range function
to help us print the even values between zero and nine.
Let's see how we could have done this using conditionals.
What do you think I should put here
to make it print just the even values.
Take a moment and think about it.
Okay, to solve this,
you may need to use 'modulo',
which you may or may not be that familiar with.
Modulo produces the remainder of a division
of two integers.
Given what you know about modulo,
pause the video,
take a moment to think about what you should put
into this missing line of code,
and then resume.
I hope your answer was something like this.
If you want to know if a value is even
you just test to see if the remainder
from dividing that value
by two, is zero.
Let's look now at the parts of
that if statement in Python, in detail.
The keyword for the conditional 'if' starts the line.
And that's the one in blue.
I modulo two equals zero,
in green, is the condition,
which resolves to a boolean either true or false.
And the colon, in orange,
says to execute the statements indented after this line,
should that condition be true.
Let's try solving another question.
Suppose I want the output to be the output on the left:
0, 11, 2, 13, 4.
Effectively, we're printing the even values between
zero and four,
and we were printing the odd values plus ten.
To solve this, you'll need to add an else statement.
Take a moment, again pause the video,
think about what you want to put here,
and then resume.
Here's the else statement we need to add.
Notice the else is followed by a colon,
and everything after the else,
which is indented,
will be executed if the if condition is false.
Let's do one more of these.
Now we're testing if I modulo three, is zero.
Notice the new if statement in blue.
If I modulo three isn't zero,
we next test to see if it's equal to one using 'else if'.
Notice that 'else if', from other languages,
translates to 'e-l-i-f' in Python.
You should have the tools to use if, else if,
or else in your Python programs now.
Our next lesson is on range functions,
we'll see you soon.