- Next, we will talk about exploring data.
After this video, you will be able
to explain the importance of exploring data
and identify methods to perform
preliminary analysis of your data.
After you put together the data that you need
for your application,
you might be tempted to immediately build models
to analyze the data.
We must resist this temptation.
The first step, after getting your data,
is to explore it, as exploring data is a big part
of the two-step data preparation activity.
You want to do some preliminary investigation
in order to gain a better understanding
of the specific characteristics of your data.
In this step, you'll be looking for things like
correlations, general trends, outliers.
And without this step, you will not be able
to use the data effectively.
Correlation graphs can be used to explore the dependencies
between different variables in the data.
General trends show you a simple graph
of how the data is progressing over time.
And outliers show you the data points
that are distant from other data points.
Plotting outliers will help you double-check
for errors in the data due to measurement.
In some cases, outliers that are not errors
might make you find a rare event.
Additionally, summary statistics
provide the numerical values to describe your data.
Summary statistics are quantities
that capture various characteristics of a set of values
with a single number or a small set of numbers.
Some basic summary statistics
that you should compute for your data set
are mean, median, mode, range, and standard deviation.
Mean and median are measures of the location
of specific values.
Mode is the value that occurs most frequently
in your data set.
And range and standard deviation are measures
of spread in your data.
Looking at these measures will give you an idea
of the nature of your data.
They can tell you if there's something wrong
with your data.
For example, if the range of the values for age in your data
includes negative numbers or a number much greater
than hundred, there's something suspicious in the data
that needs to be examined.
Python gives you functions and methods
that we can quickly explore the data
and provide these statistics.
You'll be hearing all about those by the end of this course.
Visualization techniques also provide quick and effective,
overall, a very useful way to look at data
in this preliminary analysis step.
A heat map, for instance, such as the one shown here,
can quickly give you an idea where the hot spots are.
Many different types of graphs can be used.
Histograms show the distribution of the data
and can show skewness or unusual dispersion.
Boxplots are another type of plot
for showing data distribution.
Line graphs are useful for seeing how values in your data
change over time.
Spikes in the data are also easy to spot.
Scatter plots can show correlation between two variables.
Overall, there are many types of graphs
that visualize data.
They are very useful in helping you
understand the data you have.
Looking ahead, we'll actually spend
the better part of a week just focused
on effective ways to visualize data.
In summary, what you get by exploring data,
is a better understanding of the complexity
of the data you have to work with.
This, in turn, will guide the rest of the process.