- Now that we prepared our data,
we finally can work on the analysis.
After this video,
you will be able to describe
what is involved in applying an analysis technique
to your data,
and list three basic analysis techniques.
Now that you have your data nicely prepared,
the next step is to analyze the data.
Data analysis involves building a model from your data
which is called input data.
The input data
is used by the analysis technique to build a model.
What your model generates is the output data.
There are different types of problems
and so there are different types of analysis techniques.
The main categories of analysis techniques
are classification, regression, clustering,
association analysis and graph analysis.
We will now describe each one.
In classification,
the goal is to predict the category of the input data.
An example of this is predicting the weather
as being sunny, rainy, windy or cloudy.
The categories to be predicted
are sunny, rainy, windy and cloudy in this case.
Another example is to classify a tumor
as either benign or malignant.
In this case,
the classification is referred to as binary classifications
as they are only two categories
but you can have many categories as well,
as the weather prediction problem shown here
with four different categories.
Another example is to identify
handwritten digits as being one of 10 categories,
that is zero to nine.
When your model has to predict a numeric value
instead of a category,
then the task becomes a regression problem.
An example of regression
is to predict the price of a stock over time.
The stock price is a numeric value
not a category,
so this is a regression task
instead of a classification task.
Other examples of regression
are estimating the weekly sales of a new product
and predicting the score on a test.
Next is clustering.
In clustering
the goal is to organize similar items into groups.
An example is grouping a company's customer base
into distinct segments for more effective targeted marketing
like seniors, adults and teenagers as we see here.
Other examples include
identifying areas of similar topography,
for example, mountains, desert, plains
for a land user application,
and determining different groups of weather patterns
like rainy, cold or snowy.
The goal in association analysis
is to come up with a set of rules
to capture associations between items or events.
The rules are used to determine
when items or events occur together.
A common application of association analysis
is known as market basket analysis
which is used to understand customer purchasing behavior.
For example,
association analysis can reveal
that banking customers who have
certificate of deposit accounts, shortly CDs,
also tend to be interested in other investment vehicles
such as money market accounts.
This information can be used for cross selling.
If you advertise money market accounts to your customers
with CDs, they're likely to open such an account.
According to data mining folklore,
a supermarket chain used association analysis
to discover a connection
between two seemingly unrelated products.
They discovered that many customers
who go to the supermarket late on Sunday night
to buy diapers also tend to buy beer.
This information was then used
to place beer and diapers close together on Sundays
and they saw a jump in sales of both items.
This is the famous diaper-beer connection.
Then your data can be transformed
into a graph representation with nodes and links.
Then you want to use graph analytics
to analyze your data.
This kind of data comes about
when you have a lot of entities
and connections between those entities
like social networks.
Some examples where graph analytics can be useful
are exploring the spread of a disease
or epidemic by analyzing hospitals
and doctors' records,
identification of security threats
by monitoring social media, email and text data,
and optimization of mobile communication network traffic
to ensure data quality
and reduce dropped calls.
Modeling starts with selecting one of these techniques
we listed as the appropriate analysis technique
depending on the type of problem you have.
Then,
you construct the model using the data
that you've prepared.
To validate the model,
you apply it to new data samples.
This is to evaluate how well the model does
on data that was used to construct it.
The common practice is to divide the prepared data
into a set of data for constructing the model
and reserving some of the data
for evaluating the model
after it has been constructed.
You can also use new data
prepared the same way
as the data that was used to construct the model.
Evaluating the model
depends on the type of analysis technique you used.
Let's briefly look at how to evaluate each technique.
For classification and regression
you will have the correct output
for each sample in your input data.
Comparing the correct output
and the output predicted by the model
provides a way to evaluate the model.
For clustering,
the groups resulting from clustering
should be examined to see if they make sense
for your application.
For example,
do the customer segments reflect your customer base?
Are they helpful for use
in your targeted marketing campaigns?
For association analysis and graph analysis
some investigation will be needed
to see if the results are correct.
For example,
network traffic delays need to be investigated
to see if what your model predicts
is actually happening,
and whether the sources of the delays
are where they are predicted to be in the real system.
After you have evaluated your model
to get a sense of its performance on your data,
you will be able to determine the next steps.
Some questions to consider are
should the analysis be performed
with more data in order to get better model performance?
Would using different data help?
For example, in your clustering results,
is it difficult to distinguish customers
from distinct regions?
Or would adding zip codes to your input data
to help generate final grain customer segments is needed?
Do the analysis results suggest a more detailed look
at some aspect of the problem?
For example, predicting sunny weather
gives very good results
but rainy weather predictions are just so so.
This means you should take a closer look
at your examples for rainy weather.
Perhaps there are some anomalies in those samples
or perhaps there are some missing data
that needs to be included
in order to completely capture rainy weather.
The ideal situation would be
that your model performs very well
with respect to success criteria
that were determined
when you defined a problem at the beginning of the project.
In that case,
you're ready to move on to communicating
and acting on the results that you obtained
from your analysis.
As a summary,
data analysis involves selecting the appropriate technique
for your problem,
building the model,
then evaluating the results.
As there are different types of problems,
there also different types of analysis techniques,
and we need to know about these techniques
to make sure we apply the right technique
to our dataset and problem.