Let's now look into the basic steps
in the Data Science process.
We will keep applying some or all of these steps
in all of the case studies we discuss in this course.
After this video, you will be able to
identify the steps in the data science process
and understand what each step involves.
We have already seen a simple linear form of
data science process including five distinct activities
that depend on each other.
Let's summarize each activity further
before we go into the details of each.
Acquire includes anything that makes us retrieve data
including finding, accessing, acquiring, and moving data.
It includes identification of an authenticated access
to all related data, transportation of the data from
different sources, and ways to subset and match the
data to regions or times of interests.
Sometimes we refer to this as geospatial query.
We divide, prepare data into two steps based on
the nature of the activity.
First step in data preparation involves literally
looking at the data to understand its nature, what it means,
it's quality, and format.
It often takes a preliminary analysis of data
or samples of data to understand this.
This is why this step is called Prepare.
Once we know more about the data through
exploratory analysis, the next step is pre-processing
of data for analysis.
It includes cleaning data, subsetting or filtering data,
and creating data that programs can read and understand
via modeling raw data into a more defined data model
or packaging it using a specific data format.
If there are multiple datasets involved, this step also
includes integration of data from
different data sources or streams.
The prepared data then will be passed onto
the analysis step which involves selection of
analytical techniques to use, building a model of the data,
and analyzing results.
This step can take couple of iterations on its own
or might require a data scientist to go back to steps
one and two to get more data or package data
in a different way.
Step four is for communicating results.
It includes evaluation of analytical results,
presenting them in a visual way,
and creating reports that include an assessment of results
with respect to success criteria.
Activities in each step can often be referred to the terms
like interpret, summarize, visualize,
and post-process.
The last step is to bring us
back to the very first reason we do data science for.
Its purpose.
Reporting insights from analysis and determining
actions from insights based on the purpose
you initial define is why we refer to as the Act Step.
We have now seen all of the steps in a typical
data science process.
Please note that this is an iterative process and findings
from one step may require previous steps
to be repeated with new information.
And that's the science in Data Science.