- Now that we identified what data science is,
let's come back to using data science
to extract value out of data or to solve a question.
How does the data science process function from
the point of asking a question to answering that question?
In other words, can we generalize the process steps that
we started seeing in the soccer data analysis example
and see how data science leads to insights?
After this video, you will be able to list
some of the dimensions of modern data science
and identify why analyzing these dimensions
are important for us as data scientists.
Our experience with building and observing successful
data science projects can be summarized
as a craft with a few distinct components.
Those components can be defined as
the key features or dimensions of data science.
To summarize what we talked about before, we define
data science as a multidisciplinary craft that combines
an interdisciplinary team with an application purpose.
So generally speaking, data science starts with
a team of people with an overarching broad question
and of course some data to explore.
We can say that we start with data and question
and we build a process around how we come up
with a data driven insight.
A process is a conceptual entity in the beginning
and defines the core set of steps to solve the question.
And then from then on,
drilling down through many areas of expertise
often meant blurred lines between the steps.
There are many ways to look at the process.
One way of looking at it is as two distinct activities,
mainly data engineering and data analysis
or computational big data science as I'd like to call it,
as more than simple analytics is being performed
at this stage in general.
A more detailed way of looking at the process reveals five
distinct steps or activities of the data science process,
namely acquire, prepare, analyze,
report and act.
We can simply say data science happens
at the boundary of all these steps.
Ideally, this process should support experimental work
and dynamic scalability on big data and cloud platforms.
This five step process can be used in alternative ways
in real life big data applications if we add
the dependencies of different tools to each other.
The influence of big data pushes for alternative scalability
approaches at each step of the process.
Another way to look at this process is seeing
all these steps with reporting needs in different forms,
or drawing all these activities as an iterating process
including build, explore and scale for big data as steps.
Scalable data analysis needs alternative data management
techniques, systems, analytical tools and methods
as well as nodes of scalability based on dynamic data
and computing load, change in physical infrastructure
and streaming data specific urgencies
arising from special events.
For simplicity, we will refer to the process
as a set of five sequential activities that iterate
in this course intro.
However, at the end of the day, the scalable process
should be programmable through utilization of reusable
and reproducible programming interfaces
to systems middleware, analytical tools,
visualization environments and user reporting environments.
This final dimension,
the programming of data science steps in Python,
is what we will be focusing on in this course
with some examples in Python modules for analytics,
data processing and visualization.