- Now we'll focus on formulating
a well stated data science problem.
After this video
you will be able to describe the ingredients
to formulate a science problem,
list some questions others ask
to get value out of their data,
and formulate the right questions
to guide your data science process.
The first step in any process
is to define what it is you're trying to tackle.
What is the problem that needs to be addressed
or the opportunity that needs to be asserted?
Without this,
you won't have a clear goal in mind
or know when you've solved your problem.
An example question is
how can sales figures in call center logs
become viable to evaluate any product?
Or in a manufacturing process,
how can data from multiple sensors on an equipment
be used to detect equipment failure?
How can we understand our customers
and market better to achieve effective targeted marketing?
Next,
you need to assess the situation
with respect to the problem or opportunity
you have defined.
This is a step where you need to exercise caution,
analyzing risks, costs, benefits,
contingencies, regulations,
resources and requirements of the situation.
What are the requirements of the problem?
What are the assumptions and constraints?
What resources are available to you?
This is terms of both personnel and capital
such as computer systems, equipment etc.
What are the main costs associated with this project?
What are the potential benefits?
What risks are there in pursuing a project?
What are the contingencies to potential risks?
Answers to these questions
will help you get a better overview
of the situation and better understanding
of what the project involves
and how you will guide your programming to solve the project
with all these in mind.
Then, you need to define your goals and objectives.
Defining success criteria
is also very important.
What do you hope to achieve by the end of this project?
Having clear goals and success criteria
will help you to assess the project
throughout its lifecycle.
Once you know the problem you want to address
and understand the constraints and goals,
then you can formulate the plan
to come up with the answer
that is the solution to your business problem
or the analytics you are trying to achieve.
As a summary,
defining the questions you're looking to find answers for
is a huge factor contributing to the success
of any data science project.
By following the explained set of steps,
you can formulate better questions to solve
using analytical skills
and link them to scientific and business value.