- Welcome back, let's start by discussing
why we're using Python in this course.
The learning goal for this video
is for you to be able to articulate
the benefits and limitations of Python
as a programming language.
As we already discussed last week,
we'll eventually be using Jupyter,
which was originally the combination
of three languages, Julia, Python and R.
These days, Jupyter supports
over 40 programming languages.
But we'll be seeing more of Jupyter next week.
For now, we're starting in Python
so that you have a strong programming basis
to build upon going forward.
Also, we're starting in Python so that you can use
NumPy and Pandas libraries
we'll be discussing in upcoming weeks.
Those libraries are incredibly valuable
for doing data science in Python.
But I'm getting ahead of myself.
Python, even though it's only been around since 1991,
is already one of the world's most
popular programming languages.
Why?
Well this is what the Python website has to say.
Python is powerful,
you'l find that you'll be able to accomplish
in just a few lines of Python
what might have taken three or five times
as many lines in another language,
like java or C++.
Pyhton is surprisingly fast for interpretive language.
Generally, interpretive languages can be slower
because they'd run on top of an interpreter,
rather than being compiled directly
from the machine on which they're running.
Without getting to the weeds,
you can think of this as having a middle man
between the code and the machine,
which isn't there for a language like C or C++.
So how then, is it fast?
By having some highly optimized libraries.
Often, when you're in C or C ++,
which will run as fast or nearly as fast
as comparable native C or C++ code.
Python works well with other languages.
In fact, it is often used as a glue language,
running in between components written in other languages.
And as you'll see when we get to Jupyter notebooks,
Python plays well with other languages
and those notebooks as well.
Python, because it's interpreted,
can run everywhere.
You just have to have Python installed
on your machine and any Python program will run.
Moreover, because Python is over an open source and free,
you can install it anywhere
without worrying about licenses.
Python has a number of features,
like dynamic typing and automatic memory management,
which make it both easy to learn Python
and also easy to read Python code.
We'll be diving into a number of these features this week.
And as I already said, Python's development
is open source so you don't need to
worry about license fees
and if you're interested,
you'd actually get involved in
the development of Python yourself one day.
Okay, so I hope I've sold you on why Python
is a good programming language to learn for data science.
We'll dive into the details of programming in Python
in the next video.