- We are back in our Unix shell and remember,
we hit the pwd to see print working directory,
what directory we are in,
the ls to see the list of files and folders
in this directory,
and we talk about cd to change to another directory,
but to be able to change to another directory,
we need to have another directory,
and in this
directory, at the moment, we only have two text files.
How do I know that?
When I actually list the commands in long form,
I need to see a D here at the beginning of the line
if they are directories.
So, we don't have directories
in this python for data science, yet.
So, let's create one.
The command to create that is called mkdir,
it stands for make directory.
So, it's mkdir,
and I'm making ...
My first directory, My1stDir, okay.
So, if I say, "ls" now,
I'll see My1stDir, my first directory, is here.
I can now display the contents of this directory
in long form, and I'll see that there's a D here
in the beginning of the first line.
Now, let's also see those hidden files.
Remember, if you remember from our last video
the option to see hidden files and folders
was dash A, you'll combine that with the long option,
so we'll say "dash, slash."
You'll say, "ls, dash, la, long and hidden form."
When we look at that, we see that my first directory
is a directory, that dot, that stands for
the parent directory is a directory,
and dot that stands for
the current directory is a directory.
So, now I can move to any of these directories.
I'll change my directory, cd, into My1stDir.
If you look inside it, there is nothing, let's clear.
We are in My1stDir, my first directory,
and if we ...
Do the long option ...
There's nothing.
So how do we get those hidden files?
ls minus a.
So now, if we say ls parent directory
for this directory under python for data science
we'll see everything in python for data science,
and I would like to see the contents
of fruits.txt in depth,
python for data science, so we'll say, "cat ../
"fruits.txt", and we will see the contents of fruits.txt.
What if I would like to actually copy fruits.txt
to the directory I'm in right now?
I can simply use another Unix command, cp,
that stands for copy,
cp ...
../fruits.txt,
and I would like to copy it to this directory.
What's the short for this directory is dot.
So, I said get the fruits.txt
in my parent directory, slash, ../fruits.txt,
and bring it here, cp, copy,
source, and destination.
Now, if I ls under this directory,
I'll see that I have a copy of fruits.txt here.
If I ls the parent directory,
I have a copy of fruits.txt
because I literally copied it, I didn't move it.
If I wanted ...
To have only one copy of fruits.txt
in my system, in this directory, I would have just said,
"move fruits.txt
"to this directory."
So, instead, we'll use the move command
for shakespeare.txt.
We know the parent directory has shakespeare.txt.
I can say, "move", and “mv”, another Unix command,
" ../shakespeare.txt to here."
Let's clear this so we use the move option, right?
So, now, when I say "ls",
I'll see that there's the shakespeare.txt
and fruits.txt here.
Just think for a sec
if I say, "ls ..", for the parent directory,
what you expect to see in there.
In particular, would you expect to see
shakespeare.txt there?
The answer is no, because instead of copying shakespeare.txt
we actually literally moved it using the move command.
Now, in this directory, we have two text files.
If I wanted to just display all the text files,
I could use make use of that wildcard option.
Remember that star character,
and say, "ls *.txt",
so what I'm communicating to the shell here is
I would like to list anything with a .txt option,
.txt extension.
So, ls *.txt
will give me all the text files in this directory.
So, now that we reviewed our basic commands,
we can move to the next video.