- This week, we'll kick things off
with an introduction to working with Jupyter Notebooks.
You have already seen Jupyter Notebooks
earlier in the course when we showed you the example
Sucker Analysis Notebook.
This week, we'll start building these notebooks together
and working with them in more depth.
But first, we'll be discussing why
we are using Jupyter Notebooks.
By the end of this video, you should be able to
describe the features of Jupyter Notebooks,
which have led to it rapidly gaining broad acceptance
within the data science community.
Jupyter offers a number of features
and we've already mentioned a number of them,
but let's review them.
The data science process, in most the steps
we learned about earlier in the course.
Jupyter Notebooks allow us to document that process
by combining notes, code, and graphics.
Most importantly, combining these features
allows others to read the notebooks
and understand the motives behind each step
and why decisions were made.
So it's simply good collaboration.
Going along with the importance of the documentation
and collaboration, this is also simply good science.
If someone else wants to examine your results
or build on your findings,
they can see exactly how you conducted the research.
Now, replication and inspection of other's methods
has been a core element of the scientific process
for centuries, but the advent of computational tools
has caused discussion about how to
best insure such practices
when conducting science using computing.
And Jupyter Notebooks aims to do just that.
Jupyter Notebooks don't just contain your notes and process;
they contain your results as well.
You can easily share your the notebook
in a variety of ways with colleagues
and present your results alongside the process.
And lastly, as we mentioned before,
Jupyter supports Julia, Python, R,
three of the most popular programming languages
for conducting data science today,
along with other languages.
I personally moved to Jupyter Notebooks
as soon as I saw what they had to offer,
and many of my colleagues have made the same switch.
So this lesson is all about getting you up
and running with the notebooks.